Chapter 5 
Neuro-Dynamic Game-Playing 
Algorithms 
Chapter 4 introduces a series of Abalone playing programs, based on sophisticated 
search algorithms and a hand-crafted position evaluator. In this chapter we will replace 
the position evaluator by a neural network that trains itself to be an evaluation function 
by playing against itself and learning from the outcome. Initially, this methodology 
would appear unlikely to produce any sensible learning, but the rather surprising 
finding is that a substantial amount of learning actually takes place. The best ``bred'' 
neural network outperforms all hand-crafted players not only in quality of play but 
also in speed! 
We now present a brief summary of the implemented reinforcement learning system 
(see Tesauro [Tes95]). The heart of the reinforcement learner is a neural network that 
is organized as a standard multilayer perceptron (MLP), see Section 1.1. The training 
procedure is as follows: the network observes a sequence of board positions j 0 , j 1 , 
: : : , j N , starting with the opening position j 0 and ending in a terminal position j N 
characterized by the score, i.e. 6 : 3 or 5 : 6. The board positions are fed as input 
vectors x(j 0 ), x(j 1 ), : : : , x(j N ) to the neural network, encoded using a representation 
scheme x(') that is described later. Each time step in the sequence corresponds to a 
move made by one side, i.e. a half-move or a ply. For each input position j k there is 
a neural network output ~ 
J(j k ; r), where r is the network's weight vector. ~ 
J(j k ; r) is 
the neural networks estimate of the value of the position j k . At each time step, the 
TD(--) algorithm is applied to change the network's weights. One possible formula for 
72 

5.1 Theory 73 
the weight change is as follows: 
r k+1 
`` 
~ 
J(j k+1 ; r k ) (i m ; r m ); (5.1) 
where ' is a small constant (commonly thought of as a stepsize or learning rate pa- 
rameter), and r ~ 
J(j; r) is the gradient of network output with respect to the weights 
r. 
The quantity -- is a heuristic parameter controlling the temporal credit assignment of 
how an error detected at a given time step feeds back to correct previous estimates. 
When -- = 0, no feedback occurs beyond the current time step, while when -- = 1, 
the error feeds back without decay arbitrarily far in time. Intermediate values of -- 
provide a smooth way to interpolate between these two limiting cases. 
At the end of each game, a final reward signal J ~ (j N+1 ) is given, based on the outcome 
of the game. The preceding Equation 5.1 is used to change the weights, except that 
the difference 
`` 
J ~ (j N+1 ) 
t 
each time step during the course of a game, the neural network scores every possible 
legal move. The move that is selected is then the move with maximum expected 
outcome for the side making the move. In other words, the neural network is learning 
from the results of playing against itself. This self-play training paradigm is used even 
at the start of learning, when the network's weights are random, and hence its initial 
strategy is a random strategy. 
5.1 Theory 
Chapter 2 follows Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis [BT96] to develop the notion of a stochastic 
shortest path problem (Section 2.2), respectively its generalization to two-player dy- 
namic sequential games (Section 2.2.5). We will now show how the game of Abalone 
can be fitted into this framework. 
The two principal elements of a problem of dynamic programming (DP) are, (see 
Section 2.1.1) 
1. A discrete-time dynamic system whose state transition depends on a control. We 

